---
title: Revisiting the Stimulation-Rate-Dependent Pattern Mismatch Negativity
lang: en-US
csquotes: true
mustache: input/vars.yaml
author: Marc Pabst
affiliation: Leipzig University
abstract: How does the brain process and represent successive sound in close temporal proximity? By investigating mismatch negativity (MMN) components, prior research (Sussman & Gumenyuk, 2005; Sussman, Ritter & Vaughan, 1998) has suggested that temporal proximity plays an important role in how sounds are represented in auditory memory. Here, we investigate how predictability affects the election of mismatch negativity components in auditory sequences consisting of two tones (frequent tone A = 440 Hz, rare tone B = 494 Hz, fixed SOA 100 ms). In the predictable condition, tones are presented in a fixed order whereas in the unpredictable condition, standards and deviants are presented in a pseudo-random order. We expect to find that B tones in the unpredictable condition will elicit a significant MMN while B tones in the predictable conditions will not. A repeating five-tone pattern was presented at several stimulus rates (200, 400, 600, and 00 ms onset-to-onset) to determine at what temporal proximity the five-tone repeating unit would be represented in memory. The mismatch negativity component of event-related brain potentials was used to index how the sounds were organized in memory when participants had no task with the sounds. Only at the 200-ms onset-to-onset pace was the five-tone sequence unitized in memory. At presentation rates of 400 ms and above, the regularity (a different frequency tone occurred every fifth tone) was not detected and mismatch negativity was elicited by these tones in the sequence. The results show that temporal proximity plays a role in unitizing successive sounds in auditory memory. These results also suggest that global relationships between successive sounds are represented at the level of auditory cortices.
shorttitle: Revisiting the Pattern Mismatch Negativity
...