---
title: Encoding of Predictable Tone Deviance in Recurrent Patterns
subtitle: Abschlussarbeit zur Erlangung des akademischen Grades Bachelor of Science (B.Sc.)
lang: en-US
csquotes: true
author: Marc Pabst
affiliation: Leipzig University
abstract: How does the brain process and represent patterns of tones? By investigating mismatch negativity (MMN) components, prior research (Sussman & Gumenyuk, 2005; Sussman, Ritter & Vaughan, 1998) has suggested that when presented in close temporal proximity, recurrent tone patterns are represented as single objects in auditory memory. In this study, Sussman et al.'s paradigm was replicated and extended, so that a five-tone pattern (A-A-A-A-B), consisting of pure standard (A) tone and pitch deviants (B), was presented in two distinct contexts. Contexts differed in that tone order was either predictable or pseudo-random. Data from two different samples were collected with stimulus-onset-asynchronies of 100 ms and 150 ms, respectively. Clear evidence for the elicitation of an MMN response to deviants, regardless of presentation mode, was obtained for tones presented with an SOA of 150 ms. However, results for faster presentation remained inconclusive. Although conflicting with the original authors' interpretation, the 150 ms SOA results are compatible with results from more recent studies and predictive coding accounts. Nevertheless, reliability analysis suggested that higher trial numbers might be required to obtain reasonably reliable effect estimates. Also, interpretation of ERPs from the 100 ms presentation rate proved difficult due to the overlap of ERP to subsequent tones. More sophisticated analysis methods and possible modifications to the stimulation protocol for future research are discussed.
shorttitle: Encoding of Predictable Tone Deviance
...