\newpage
\newpage

# Discussion
### Summary and Interpretation of Results
When presenting rare deviant tones in a stream of frequent standard tones, deviant tones elicit more negative EEG potentials than standard tones. Known as the mismatch negativity (MMN), this finding is one of the most well-studied phenomena in auditory neuroscience. This thesis aimed to conceptually replicate findings reported by earlier studies suggesting that no MMN is generated if certain contextual information is available. Specifically, @sussmanPredictabilityStimulusDeviance1998 and @sussmanOrganizationSequentialSounds2005 proposed that recurring tone sequences at fast SOAs would be processed as a single auditory object.  That is, sequences of tones presented in close temporal proximity should be sequentially grouped, and both standard and deviant tones would be fully integrated into this representation. Thus, deviant tones presented as part of these sequences should not constitute a *mismatch* since tones may be fully predictable. 

Indeed, the original authors found no MMN response for deviants that were predictable in that they were presented as part of a recurrent pattern (*predictable condition*) and presented at SOAs of 200 ms or faster. Conversely, a clear MMN response was elicited by deviants when presentation order followed no regular pattern (*random condition*) or presentation rate was slower. 

This thesis extends Sussman et al.'s work by introducing the five-tone sequences (A-A-A-A-B) from the _predictable_ condition--consisting of four standard tones (A) and one pitch deviant (B)--into the _random_ condition, allowing for comparisons between both conditions unaffected by differences in local pre-stimulus history. Thus, diverging from the original analysis, only a subset of all presented deviant tones was analyzed in the *random* condition. For the *predictable condition*, the original authors' interpretation suggested that B tones presented as part of the recurrent pattern should not be processed as deviants, and therefore no MMN should be elicited. Extending Sussman et al., it was also hypothesized that rare violations of the pattern,  created by replacing the deviant tone with a standard tone (i.e. A-A-A-A-A) would elicit an MMN response although consisting of five physically identical tones. Indexing violations of a more complex rule, this response was termed _pattern MMN_ as opposed to *local MMN* elicited in response to local single-tone violations of the _proportional regularity_.

Several hypotheses were considered in this thesis. Specifically, local MMN were investigated for random and predictable presentation. Elicitation of local MMNs should be based on the extraction and usage of *proportional regularity*, i.e. standard tones are more frequent than deviant tones. Based on the account from @sussmanPredictabilityStimulusDeviance1998 and @sussmanOrganizationSequentialSounds2005, local MMN should, however, not emerge when more informative *pattern regularities* are present, assuming the underlying neuronal mechanism can extract and use these more complex rules. Two alternative underlying explanations were proposed in the introduction section of this thesis. Table 5 gives an overview of the statistical hypotheses that were tested. 

```{=latex}
\input{tables/hypotheses.tex}
```
#### Local MMN in the Random Condition.
Deviant tones were expected to elicit more negative responses in the MMN latency range than standard tones when presented pseudo-randomly, mirroring he classical and well-proven auditory oddball paradigm. While this hypothesis held for the slower presentation rate at an SOA of 150 ms, surprisingly, results for faster presentation (100 ms SOA) remained inconclusive when analyzing the originally defined subset of tones (360 epochs on average). Simulating reliability for different sample sizes by subsampling from all deviants and their directly preceding standard tones (in the *random* condition) revealed that epoch numbers used in the analysis above might only offer low to moderate reliablity. It is important to note, however, that power cannot be directly inferred from reliability, as realibility is inherantly a population-based measure [@humphreysCommentsRelationReliability1989]. Nevertheless, increasing realibility (i.e, avoiding error of measurement) is an important aspect when increasing power [@zimmermanResolvingIssueHow2015]. Thus, this observation may be interpreted as an indication of low power, potentially explaining the absence of a significant effect. Interestingly, when the sample was expanded to include all deviant tones (2920 epochs on average)--therefore increasing the sample size at the cost of comparability with the *predictable* condition--strong evidence for an MMN was found. Taken together, small effect sizes, low reliability, and the fact that an MMN was found when including more deviant tone raise the question of whether power may have been simply too low to find a concluisive effect.

#### Local MMN in the Predictable Condition.
It was hypothesized that if tones are presented as part of a repeated five-tone sequence with no change in occurrence probability, deviants should *not* elicit mismatch responses. While results remained inconclusive for faster presentation (100 ms SOA), contradictory evidence was found for data collected with an SOA of 150 ms. On the surface, results appeared to be inconsistent with outcomes and conclusions from @sussmanOrganizationSequentialSounds2005. as a clear MMN was found in the predictable condition but in Sussman et al. On closer inspection, however, it must be noted that @sussmanOrganizationSequentialSounds2005 interpreted the failure to find an effect as the absence of an effect. Therefore, results presented for the 150 ms SOA do not contradict the original findings but merely conflict with the authors' interpretation.

Moreover, although seemingly at odds with Sussman's account, the results parallel those of more recent EEG and MEG studies. For instance, @bekinschteinNeuralSignatureConscious2009 and @wacongneEvidenceHierarchyPredictions2011 found MMN responses for spectral deviants when presenting five-tone patterns similar to those used in this thesis at an SOA of 150 ms. Analogous results using pure tones and magnetoencephalography were obtained by  @recasensEncodingNestedLevels2014 with an SOA of 200 ms. 

Surprisingly, in the 100 ms condition, responses to predictable deviants were more positive in the MMN latency range than responses to standard tones. Challenging one's expectations and contradicting the results from the 150 ms condition, this observation was unexpected. However, visual inspection of the ERP trace revealed a possible explanation for this finding: pre-stimulus intervals exhibited clear baseline differences that could have obscured real differences (or no differences) in responses. Thus, this result might have to be considered as an artifact of rapid stimulation and ERP overlap. Possible approaches that remedy this problem and may be used to disentangle evoked responses from subsequent tones will be discussed in a later paragraph.

#### Contrasting local MNNs between Conditions.
Based on the notion that _local MMNs_ should only be elicited in the _random_ and not in the _predictable_ condition, _local MMNs_ should differ between the two conditions. Statistical analysis provided support for this assumption only at the faster 100 ms presentation rate. However, this seems mainly to be driven by the more positive response to deviant tones in the _predictable_ condition, as outlined above. Thus, this might not be taken as unconditional evidence in favor of the aforementioned hypothesis, and care must be taken when interpreting this effect.

#### Pattern-MMN.
No conclusive results were found regarding the hypothesis that violations of the regular five-tone pattern would trigger an MMN response. This assumption was based on the notion of higher-order MMNs that should be elicited when violating patterns of multiple tones that are represented as a single auditory object. 

There are several avenues to explain the lack of a detectable effect. First, epoch numbers were relatively small, and therefore statistical power may have been very low. Secondly, mechanisms underlying MMNs for detection of simple local deviations might be different from those responsible for higher-order rule violations. An interesting line of research has suggested that pattern MMNs may involve different latencies than those explored in this study. For example, @bekinschteinNeuralSignatureConscious2009 found that pattern deviations did not trigger MMNs at 150 ms SOA, but eclicited deflection at later latencies (>300 ms after stimulus onset). @recasensEncodingNestedLevels2014 reported no evidence for differences at earlier latencies but found that late MMNm responses (approximately 160 ms after stimulus onset) indexed pattern violations. Based on source reconstruction, authors also argued that neuronal generators engaged in the encoding of _proportional regularities_ might be distinct from those encoding _pattern regularities_. 

This notion is consistent with computer simulations suggesting that the cortical mechanisms underlying the processing of sensory information as indexed by the MMN response may operate at several different hierarchical levels, spanning from the level of simple stimuli to more complex patterns [@kiebelHierarchyTimeScalesBrain2008]. There is growing support for this theoretical notion of hierarchical predictive coding in the auditory domain from empirical work [e.g., @cornellaDetectionSimplePattern2012]. When following this line of reasoning, detection of simple feature deviations should occur at lower cortical levels and become apparent relatively early (i.e., within typical MMN latencies or earlier). In contrast, deviations from complex rules should be detected at higher cortical levels. Thus, effects in ERP would only become visible at later latencies. 

In general, these findings might be better explained by a more general predictive coding framework than by the relatively narrow auditory integration-based account originally proposed by Sussman et al.. However, it remains unclear what the SOA's role would be. It is still very much conceivable that short SOAs facilitate pattern extraction compared to slower stimuli presentation. Also, if knowledge of complex regularities is constituted at higher cortical levels, backpropagation might inform mismatch detection at lower levels. While this, evidently, does not seem to result in a full suppression of MMNs to simple deviant tones, MMN responses might be partially diminished, thus explaining results from @sussmanOrganizationSequentialSounds2005.


### Limitations and Future Research
In sum, results in the 150 ms condition contradict the interpretation of Sussman et al. An MMN response was found regardless of whether deviant tones occurred pseudo-randomly or in a predictable fashion, challenging the idea of a fully integrated representation of the five-tone sequences. However, data collected with tones presented at an SOA of 100 ms remained inconclusive to a large extent due to two likely problems. On the one hand, low epoch numbers might have reduced the reliability of results. On the other hand, the fast presentation rate made it challenging to interpret responses to subsequent tones due to considerable overlap between ERPs. Several approaches to disentangle individual responses have been suggested [e.g., @plourdeInterweavingOverlappingEvoked1988; @woldorffDistortionERPAverages1993]. Regrettably, these options often require specific stimulation patterns that predefine and limit experimental designs. However, more recently proposed methods include regressions ERPs [e.g.,  @smithRegressionbasedEstimationERP2015; @ehingerUnfoldIntegratedToolbox2019], that allow separating responses to different stimuli employing multiple regression models. Due to collinearity, however, they tend to work poorly on stimuli presented with a constant SOA. One method to deal with this is to add jitter to stimulus onsets, although it remains unclear if jittered presentation would still lead to the proposed grouping of tone patterns as proposed by Sussman et al.

It should also be noted that the original authors' filter parameters differed from those used in this thesis. In addition, the original study did not use ICA for artifact removal. However, it remains questionable whether this can fully account for the discrepancies found. Still, one might examine the impact of different preprocessing steps such as ICA and baselining to improve the interpretability of results. Recently introduced approaches such as multiverse analyses [@steegenIncreasingTransparencyMultiverse2016a] could provide additional transparency in reporting.

### Conclusion 
In conclusion, results from @sussmanPredictabilityStimulusDeviance1998 were partially replicated but statistical analysis conflicted with the original authors' interpretation. Evidence was obtained for mismatch detection to simple proportional regularity violation even in the presence of a higher-order pattern. No _pattern MMN_ was found at the latencies used by @sussmanPredictabilityStimulusDeviance1998. Whilst the original hypothesis must be rejected for the slower SOA, no clear conclusions could be reached with respect to the other two possible explanations outlined in the introduction as several statistical tests remained inconclusive or hard to interpret. This was probably due to low reliability and ERPs considerably overlapping between subsequent tones. Larger sample sizes and more sophisticated analysis methods might offer more insight but may need modification to the presentation procedure. Finally, the presented results underline the need for replication studies and careful interpretation of statistical results.
